Add documentation about vLLM FIPS compliance (#42190)
vllm-project/vllm: docs/usage/security.md

- **Do not copy cache contents from untrusted sources.** If you distribute cache artifacts between environments, ensure they originate from a trusted build pipeline.
- **Container deployments:** If mounting cache directories into containers, ensure the volume source is trusted.

## FIPS Compatibility

> vLLM does **not** claim FIPS 140-2 or FIPS 140-3 compliance and is not a validated cryptographic module. Recent changes have improved vLLM's *tolerance* of FIPS-enabled hosts — that is, avoiding crashes when non-approved algorithms are blocked — but tolerance is not the same as compliance. Whether a deployment satisfies FIPS requirements depends on the host operating system, the OpenSSL provider backing Python's `hashlib` and `ssl` modules, and which optional dependencies are installed.

Reviewer: The first sentence sounds like "is not FIPS compliant" as in, can not be FIPS compliant, but I don't think that's the case, right?

```suggestion
FIPS compliance depends on many factors, so a vLLM deployment is not automatically FIPS compliant. Recent changes have improved vLLM's *tolerance* of FIPS-enabled hosts — that is, avoiding crashes when non-approved algorithms are blocked — but tolerance is not the same as compliance. Whether a deployment satisfies FIPS requirements depends on the host operating system, the OpenSSL provider backing Python's `hashlib` and `ssl` modules, and which optional dependencies are installed.
```

Author: I think this issue is I don't think we can say it runs on FIPS systems when https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/issues/40741 is still open. I think I was looking for it to be explicitly called out, so that there is no ambiguity around FIPS being a feature that vLLM offers. I can still change the first line, if you think that will sound cleaner.

Reviewer: I'd rather not make any strong, definitive statements. We can provide guidance and pointers, but we should leave it to others to figure out for sure whether their deployments are compliant or not.

Author: Sounds good! I've updated the first line!

- **Do not copy cache contents from untrusted sources.** If you distribute cache artifacts between environments, ensure they originate from a trusted build pipeline.
- **Container deployments:** If mounting cache directories into containers, ensure the volume source is trusted.

## FIPS Compatibility

vLLM does **not** claim FIPS 140-2 or FIPS 140-3 compliance and is not a validated cryptographic module. Recent changes have improved vLLM's *tolerance* of FIPS-enabled hosts — that is, avoiding crashes when non-approved algorithms are blocked — but tolerance is not the same as compliance. Whether a deployment satisfies FIPS requirements depends on the host operating system, the OpenSSL provider backing Python's `hashlib` and `ssl` modules, and which optional dependencies are installed.

### FIPS-relevant configuration

Operators running vLLM on FIPS-enabled hosts should select FIPS-approved algorithms via the following knobs:

- **Multimodal input hashing** — `VLLM_MM_HASHER_ALGORITHM` defaults to `blake3`, which is not FIPS-approved. Set it to `sha256` or `sha512` in FIPS-enabled environments.

> - **Prefix-cache hashing** — choose `sha256` or `sha256_cbor`. The `xxhash` and `xxhash_cbor` options are not FIPS-approved.

Author: Good catch. The actual knob is the CLI flag `--prefix-caching-hash-algo` (config field `prefix_caching_hash_algo` in `vllm/config/cache.py`), not an env var — there is no `VLLM_PREFIX_CACHING_HASH_METHOD`. Updated the doc to reference the real flag.

- **TLS ciphers** — use `--ssl-ciphers` to restrict the API server's TLS handshake to FIPS-approved cipher suites that match your environment's policy.

### Automatic fallback for non-security MD5 use

vLLM uses MD5 in a few places to derive non-security cache keys (for example, configuration hashes). These call sites pass `usedforsecurity=False` and additionally fall back to SHA-256 when the underlying OpenSSL provider refuses MD5 outright (see `safe_hash()` in `vllm/utils/hashing.py`). No user action is required; this behavior is documented so that auditors and security reviewers can identify the MD5 references and understand their purpose.

### Optional dependencies to avoid

Some optional dependencies provide hash implementations that are not FIPS-approved and should not be installed in environments with strict cryptographic controls:

- `xxhash` — used only when an `xxhash`-based prefix-cache algorithm is selected.
- `blake3` — used only when `VLLM_MM_HASHER_ALGORITHM=blake3` (the default), so override the env var if you do not want this code path exercised.

> vLLM functions without either of these packages.

Author: Verified — `blake3` is in `requirements/common.txt` and pulled in by standard installs, so labeling it alongside `xxhash` as "optional" was misleading. Reworded the section to: (1) state that `blake3` is currently a required install dep but imported lazily and only used when `VLLM_MM_HASHER_ALGORITHM=blake3`, so overriding the env var keeps the non-FIPS code path dormant, and (2) call out `xxhash` as a true optional dep (not in `common.txt`) that operators can simply leave uninstalled. Operators whose policy forbids the package being present can `pip uninstall blake3` after install — vLLM continues to function as long as the env var is set to a non-blake3 value.

### Beyond hashing: other FIPS considerations

Hashing is the area where vLLM has explicit FIPS-aware code, but a FIPS-compliant deployment depends on several factors that sit outside vLLM itself. Operators should evaluate the following with their platform and security teams:

- **Host crypto provider.** Python's `hashlib` and `ssl` modules are FIPS-aware only when Python is linked against a FIPS-validated OpenSSL (or equivalent) provider supplied by the host OS. vLLM inherits whatever provider the host configures — it does not bundle one.
- **API server TLS.** TLS termination for the OpenAI-compatible API server uses the host's OpenSSL via Python's `ssl` module. Restrict the cipher suite with `--ssl-ciphers` to match your environment's FIPS policy, and ensure server certificates are issued with FIPS-approved algorithms and key sizes.
- **Outbound HTTPS.** Model and asset downloads (for example, via `huggingface_hub`) use the same host TLS stack. The same provider/cipher considerations apply.

> - **Inter-node communication is unencrypted by default.** As described in [Inter-Node Communication](#inter-node-communication), PyTorch Distributed, KV-cache transfer, and data-parallel channels do not encrypt traffic. FIPS environments that require FIPS-approved cryptography for data in transit must provide that protection externally — for example, via an isolated network, an mTLS sidecar, or IPsec — since vLLM's internal channels cannot satisfy the requirement on their own.

Author: Agreed — listing an isolated network as an example of FIPS-approved cryptography conflates network isolation with cryptography. Reworded to drop "isolated network" from that list, scope the external mitigations to FIPS-validated modules (mTLS sidecar, IPsec), and call out network isolation separately as defense-in-depth that does not satisfy a cryptography-for-data-in-transit requirement.
